**Rule 3: Keep CTEs small and single purpose**
In order to make your life easier when decomposing complex queries, aim to have your CTEs be small and single purpose. What I mean by that is that your CTE needs to be an encapsulated logical component that helps you build your final query easier. It shouldn't try to do too much.

It should act like a LEGO piece that can be used once or multiple times in the final select. It should select only a subset of the columns from the table in question, perform any needed calculations and maybe even filter a subset of rows as well. (I call these patterns [[Pre-Calculation]] and [[Pre-Filtering]])

Unfortunately SQL doesn't allow you to create libraries of queries that you later import into any query you need like a typical programming language (e.g. Python) but you can think of your CTEs like libraries you later "import" in your final select statement.

For example if we refer back to the question in Rule 1, and we wanted to figure out the total number of users by day and user type, you can create a CTE that selects only the sessions that had a `user_id` and landing page URL that matches the product page. Then you can join that CTE with the users table to get additional information.

Here's an example to illustrate this with completely fictitious tables:

Without a CTE
```
SELECT
	wl.visit_date,
	u.user_type,
	COUNT(*) as total_visits
FROM
	web_logs wl
	LEFT JOIN users u 
		ON wl.user_id = u.user_id
		AND u.user_type IS NOT NULL
WHERE
	landing_url LIKE '%product%'
	AND user_id IS NOT NULL
GROUP BY
	1,2
```

With a CTE
```
WITH product_page_visit AS (
	SELECT
		visit_date,
		user_id,
		referral_url
	FROM
		web_logs
	WHERE
		landing_url LIKE '%product%'
		AND user_id IS NOT NULL
)
SELECT
	pv.visit_date,
	u.user_type,
	COUNT(*) as total_visits
FROM
	product_page_visit pv
	LEFT JOIN users u ON pv.user_id = u.user_id
WHERE
	u.user_type IS NOT NULL
GROUP BY
	1,2
```

You can clearly see that the second query is a lot easier to understand and maintain and doesn't require 

Keeping CTEs small and single purpose helps also with query maintainability and performance. We'll talk more about that in the next couple of chapters
